What is your name?
My name's Ian. I live in Bangor. And in Bangor I grow fruit trees.
I've been growing trees there for probably 30 years or so.
Prior to that I used to work in Canada in the woods.
And I was Mr Organic at that time, shall we say, in the area.
And about 15 years ago I found, or rather I took credit for the discovery of the Bardsey Island apple avalanche.
And that really sort of led to a resurgence of Welsh varieties.
And now that's all I do. I only produce Welsh varieties of apple and other fruit.
I had a friend called Andy and we used to creep around looking.
We'd go in our old orchards, for example, old abandoned orchards, old stately homes and stuff.
And looking for old trees that were still alive and doing well.
If a tree was 100 years old, let's say, and still producing and still healthy and producing good fruit,
it would obviously be a good candidate to produce and grow in North Wales.
Because prior to that there was no written knowledge about how fruit trees were doing North Wales or Wales in general.
Because the people that wrote the books, they all came from Kent, the Garden of England, where all the big time experts are.
So me and Andy were creeping about, used to creep about.
And one summer or autumn he was working on Bardsey Island, ringing birds.
Because it's a migratory stop and there's the oldest bird observatory in Britain, in Bardsey Island apparently.
And someone said, go to that old apple tree by that house, mate, and put some apples in the mist net, you know, a funnel shaped thin net to catch the birds, which they can ring.
And he did that and didn't recognise what the apples were, ground in this strange little island.
And the tree had been smashed and battered against the wall of the house.
And despite that, the fruit were really clean and really good.
So he brought them to me, the fruit, I didn't know, going to the local experts supposedly, I didn't know what they were.
But I sent the fruit then to the National Fruit Collection.
This is just one and a half fruit really by then.
And the experts there proclaimed that it was a unique variety.
And since then it's been genetically fingerprinted so that we know that it is.
So that's how the Bardsey Island apple, the avalently, came about.
Interestingly, we just spoke to Emily from the Clamberis Cider Society.
And Andy was living in one little shed on the island.
Emily was living in another and they got it together.
And so it might well be maybe Emily and all her charms should take the credit for the discovery of the apple.
And so it was me that then started to propagate the tree and all the rest of it.
That's it really.
OK, so for three or four years I started making Bardsey apple trees.
Making them at my own expense, going to the island collecting little titty bits of salt burnt wood.
And buying root stops and grafting them.
And then I'd make the trees, sell the trees and then give all the money to the trust that run the island.
People would just make their checks out to the Bardsey Island Trust.
So I did that for three or four years, which was fine by me.
So then I started making the Bardsey apple and surprisingly selling them very well.
And then people started saying, oh, they've got rare apples in their garden.
They've got old apples or things like that.
And I started then doing sort of academic research and gradually over the years accumulated a collection of 50 or so perhaps, something like that.
And gone wider now.
I mean the other big thing is the Denby plum, which is the only Welsh plum, which is about to get its PGI protected geographic indication status.
I think this year I'm going there on Sunday to find that out.
And that would be good because it would be a big deal for Denby.
Denby needs something. It's a ghost town really.
Just because they've either been bred or evolved or been found, that they do well in this climate.
When I say this climate, I don't necessarily mean Clambereth youth hostel because no one lives above here.
People used to grow fruit around here.
But I think my theory is that once Lord Penryn financed the railway from basically from Penryn to the rest of the world,
Carrie's slate, you then got empty wagons bringing all kinds of other English produce.
So any Welsh orchards would have faded away.
I think there were commercial orchard projects in De Frenc Onwy Valley.
There were commercials growing there I believe.
They would just get swamped with imports.
Well I discovered another word.
I, by various ways, I've resurrected old varieties.
Obviously they're interesting from a cultural point of view with the big C.
And from a cultural point of view with the little C, they grow here.
Most varieties from England or other foreign countries won't do here.
It's too cold, it's too wet, it's too damp.
The soil's too poor. They don't ripen. There's not enough sunlight.
So if you get varieties that do well here, then you don't have to spray them.
A lot of people want to grow things organically and they think that's just letting them grow, not spraying them.
But it doesn't work like that. You have to grow things organically.
The number one thing is to plant the right varieties for your area.
Well, at Pant D, there's a big cider orchard that's got two and a half thousand trees at Penangreis, Jalisarn Penangreis Way.
They've got about a thousand of my trees.
So it's good to see how each of those does in comparison with each other.
And also in comparison with standard cider varieties.
And for example, Gwech Namil, better than a thousand, Sikno Ferver, that is their favourite up there.
So that does really well and it has a lot of juice, so it's good for cider.
All the others up there, all of mine are doing well.
I mean in comparison, or the Avalon Lee Bards is doing well for sweet cider.
In comparison with most of the English ones, which are doing terribly, they're from Somerset or Devon or somewhere much a nicer climate than the North Wales have to offer.
So it's a good, with Richard up there, his mistakes are good as a knowledge base.
You can go there and you can compare different varieties.
Hopefully your Roche Perry project is doing that sort of thing as well, isn't it?
Unfortunately that will take time before we get any results of that.
I don't think I would have suggested when the project was set up, it would have been good to have someone or people going around looking at existing trees and existing, you could get a lot of knowledge from that.
You don't get any knowledge from a two-year-old tree at all, we don't get any fruit.
Whereas I don't think there was part of this project, was there?
I don't think of people going around looking, I mean someone could have come to me and gone through my computer records and hard copy records and then had a list of people that had bought trees off me and then they could have gone around Wales.
If they were old records, like paper records, they could have gone around seeing how those trees were doing rather than, well both are good to plant trial orchards but also visiting existing trees.
I don't know, I'm not a cider producer and most of these varieties I would say nobody knows because they haven't been around, they've been around but neglected, they haven't been planted.
I mean that's what I said, you could have done with someone from the Royal Parry people, have gone around to have found that out.
My trouble is I sell a bunch of trees to someone and then I rarely hear from them again and then also it's realistically going to take ten years before planting a tree and the tree is then getting to its maximum cropping potential.
Then we actually know how it does. For example, Guachnamil, the favourite at Pant D, the mother tree that I have has become strongly biennial. Loads of fruit one year, nothing the next.
Well that doesn't matter to me because I'm only really producing wood and knowledge when I grow a tree.
If you're planting a commercial plantation you don't want your trees to become biennial which they don't, it takes a few years and obviously a few years of neglect before they get these biennial habits.
If they are strongly biennial it makes them, you will be less inclined to plant them because you will have years with almost zero crop. A lot of side of the trees are biennial.
I've just grafted, I don't know, 2,300 trees, something like that. That's really intense. Not just doing the grafting but preparing everything and this year I changed my system totally as well of how to grow the trees.
I don't have a typical time. From November onwards I spend a lot of time packaging trees and sending them off. I'm primarily now an internet business.
I used to supply all the garden centres in the area and I've gradually stopped doing that. I still deal with the public, I get a lot of public come round.
I don't work five days a week, I mean I work seven days a week sometimes. I don't have any regular, it always seems to be stuff to do.
Yeah, well now I can have a little break. The grafting is done. Over this weekend I repaired problems with the irrigation system so now I could have a couple of weeks off, which I probably will.
But there again I've got to repair polytunnels, you know, winter damage. I still haven't had time to do that yet.
If you go to my website now there's not much that I've got left. So hopefully sales are peaking off.
People buy the trees all year round. You go to B&Q, people buy pots of plants with lovely pretty little flowers on. We're not meant to do that. If you plant them the flowers die.
People are out of touch with seasonality and out of touch with plant physiology. You should plant things when they're dormant.
In garden centres people buy them with apples on, which you shouldn't do that. I used to obviously, being a proper nursery man, rub out any small fruit because they'd do well when they were planted.
But then I realised that if you leave the fruit on people buy them more. So I stopped doing that, which is bad really. There's marketing and that.
The trees that I've grafted can sit there. Summer's starting to move but there's a month or so of just rubbing out growth on the rootstocks to force the sap up into the scion with the piece of wood I've grafted on.
In the summer I try and do something with my boys if that's possible, go away somewhere. Well I force myself to go. I pay people to look after the place.
I will lose trees to an extent and lose business to an extent but I don't really care. I'd rather have my life rather than the work situation.
Because I don't have land, I don't have a great big tractor that could plough up a field and I could stick all the trees in and walk away.
I just have a reclaimed swamp with a lot of builders' rubble on top of it. So it's not an ideal situation at all.
If you want to be successful as a farmer or a grower, the best thing to do is inherit your father's farm. And I didn't do that, I made a mistake there.
Quite often unfortunately community groups end up in pretty useless places to plant the trees, like this place here is to be honest.
It's interesting to find out what goes wrong with the trees but when you're given pieces it's hard to find pieces of land.
The good lands are all tied up by the farmers as a rule. That's a major problem.
Also a major problem with community groups is it often ends up one or two people doing it. And then if there's one or two people sort of fade away, the trees are just left.
I've just spent some time at Moylakee and I've said I'd go back there and help them. These are trees that I supplied them about 15 years ago and they're terrible.
And over the years people have come, took an interest and then faded away. And I go there every couple of years and offer advice and do stuff.
Usually unpaid, gets a bit depression really after a while.
You know, that's the nature of community projects. I'm not running them down but often they get the worst land.
Here I would say it's unsuitable but it was available obviously. Where they planted at Moylakee was unsuitable but available.
That's often the problem. Land in this country, good land, is hard to come by. I mean I don't have any.
I think I donated a load of trees to the surgery in Clamberis. There's not a great place because I think they get vandalised quite easily.
Some that, and then you get counsel. The trouble is, especially with fruit trees, it requires quite a lot of knowledge, quite a lot of prior knowledge.
So really you could say that the first few generations of trees you buy could well be destined to failure.
The first trees I planted I got from the skip behind Moylakee where they'd thrown them out thinking this is great, I'm getting trees for nothing.
Well it probably took ten years for me growing those unsuitable trees I've got to grow to find out that they were disease prone.
That I'd chosen them. Even if I'd bought them they would have been the wrong ones.
If you've got community groups, people at large, commercial people like Richard of Pandy, he planted two and a half thousand cider trees.
And he's already replaced over a thousand of those, grabbed them up with a thousand of mine, Welsh ones are more suitable.
So I would say almost everybody is destined to make mistakes. If you go to a garden centre they're bloody useless, they don't know anything.
If you go to Liddell's or Tesco's to buy your trees where people buy them now, they know nothing.
They know nothing and you won't even, you would just, people just assume that what are in Tesco's in the fruit section are ones that will grow in your garden.
Why wouldn't they? And they don't. Especially in North Wales or Wales in general.
So yeah I would say whoever plants their trees their first one or two orchards are going to be a steep learning curve as a rule.
Obviously there's more knowledge out there now, like with you lot, with me to an extent I suppose.
People will come to me and say I want some trees for Clamberis and I now have a bit of an idea.
Whereas prior to that they would sell you, the garden centres sell you the trees that people know.
The trees that grow in up here on the shelves in Tesco's. Read your books, read your books.
But some people would do that. There's plenty of stuff online obviously.
But unfortunately people starting off aren't aware of the problems.
If you don't know anything, chances are you will assume that you could just go to a garden centre, pay your money and plant the tree.
And the garden centre staff now are totally untrained as a rule. They will know nothing either.
You ideally go online and there's plenty of stuff there.
I mean I spent a lot of years collecting varieties from places with a Celtic climate.
Like I've still got a lot of Irish apples, a lot of Devon Cornwall apples, a lot of Scottish ones that have all got comparable climates to here.
To test them, to see how, and that's what I used to do.
I was making a collection of disease resistant varieties that would do well in Wales.
With the discovery of the Avowentley, Bardsley Island apple, I then changed my direction because I then started to sell Welsh ones.
Some of the Welsh ones of course just because they happen to have come from Wales doesn't necessarily mean they would do in all of Wales.
Wales really varies climatically like the Monmouth ones. Monmouth is the same as England, it has been isn't it, in its day.
And then you've got altitude differences. You've got the highest mountain, the lowest beaches.
So you've got Snowdon just behind us and you've got Anglesey just down there.
Sea level is only four or five miles away.
So what might do well in Carnarvon might not do well where we are now for example.
To do your research, the trouble with doing research is you often have to be pre-warned as to what you're looking for and you might not know that.
I had a lady, she bought trees off me in the past and she was commercial and she wanted 25 of these, 25 of that and 50 Bakers Delicious.
And I said why on earth would you want 50 Bakers Delicious?
Because they're an early apple and they go off in a couple of weeks.
You've got 50 trees, you've got 100 pounds, that's 5,000, that's five tonnes of apples which you've got to get rid of in two weeks or something.
And she'd done all her research and asking around and it turned out Bakers Delicious did well where she lived and everybody liked it.
But she didn't realise it's a bit like having 5,000 lettuces.
You've got a problem if you grow something like that, haven't you?
You're much better off spreading something out.
So she'd done her research but not quite enough.
That's the trouble.
So it's a difficult problem and I've made more mistakes than anybody I'm sure over the years, planted inappropriate things.
And then you can then get a little bit of knowledge and you find that, like I say, that a variety might be disease resistant but the season is very short so you can only have a few of those.
Or it might be biennial.
You could easily end up planting four or five orchards sequentially one after the other, gradually improving how you do it.
But after you've done four or five you're probably dead.
It's a lifetime gone, isn't it?
So all this stuff, it's really protracted.
That's why your two-year project is you need to spend the rest of your life doing this.
I'm sure you can't face it but that's what you should do.
And even then when you do that then you get climate change so Wales will soon no longer have a Welsh climate.
So that's something else to consider.
We're now 22 days in advance of what we used to be.
I'm grafting 22 days earlier.
This is, we've got lots of records of national fruit collection and stuff of when things flower and the rest of it.
We're 22 days earlier.
That makes it, it's not as simple as 22 days.
It's not as simple as grafting 22 days earlier because last year I grafted, it was really hot, I panicked, I grafted early then it got really cold and I lost quite a few hundred trees because of that.
You've got things like diseases changing.
Brown rock millennia is devastating all the plums and damsons around here.
I'm selling the denby plum as a disease resistant plum.
If conditions change then it might, the denby plum, it's the same thing that's produced in the 1780s that hasn't changed.
But millennia, the disease can change, the climate can change so that it could therefore make that plum variety susceptible.
So nobody knows. It's a difficult problem.
It's a long term project but the climate and the world might be changing quicker than our knowledge can evolve.
There's a happy note there for you.
Well, my neighbour used to sell carpets.
His hobby, and I've worked through trees in his garden, was raising pigeons.
He's an internationally famous and successful pigeon racer.
He's got about 300 in his loft.
And I said to him, why don't you stop selling carpets and concentrate on your pigeons?
And he said it would probably, he would lose his hobby and it would become a job.
And that was up to me. It's a job. I don't really, it's my job now.
That makes it different, doesn't it?
I don't go to Canada, I used to work in Canada every year. I don't go there anymore.
I do this. I don't know why I do it.
I've had my son working for me the last couple of weeks. That's been really good.
He's just got a degree from Cardiff in music composition.
It would be great if he took it over to an extent but I rather doubt it.
Kids don't want to do that sort of stuff anymore.
I do it because people ring me up and you have to do it sort of thing.
But I've never worked so much in my life as constantly, I've never done that before.
I used to do more exciting things.
I'd go to Canada, make my money and then do whatever.
Travel the world or try and change it.
I'm not doing that at the moment.
I would like to, I would really like to go down to Kent or wherever
and see how the big boys do it. But there's such a leap.
I'm only backyard really.
I did go to a Kent grower, friend of a friend, and he'd been there.
I think they'd been there five generations.
He's had three farms, huge, huge, huge.
And within a few sentences I knew I was in another league.
I didn't know what he was talking about.
There are no courses in pirmology.
As far as I did look, I looked quite hard a few years ago.
I'm not worried about getting some certificate to hang on the wall,
I've got enough of that stuff.
I'm not worried about academic qualifications,
but I just thought if I tagged along and went down there for a couple of weeks somewhere,
I just couldn't find anything.
I was quite shocked really.
And maybe that's how it is.
Maybe there are other courses.
I did look.
There is a course in September, Welsh Perry one,
which I signed up for, said I was interested.
But then having looked at the website of the people doing it,
it's all very permacultury, which is all very well,
but probably might not go to that.
But otherwise, yeah, I'd like to go down to Kent to see.
There's Mickey Mouse and it about, or small scale.
And then there's the big industrial scale, and not much in between.
So I'd like to, there's lots to learn out there, isn't there?
And with everything in life, the more you know, the more you know there is to know.
You can do it like I do it, just trial and error.
Well, that implies that most of the things you do are wrong,
which is fair enough, it's how you learn.
But I would like to go in some courses like Pershaw College.
I rung them up and there was nothing there.
The local college, the North Wales one, at Northop, they ring me up.